My frustration with this idea of fiat is
that it robs us of the power of
analysis. We can understand money. We
really can. For almost all of our money
sits, as you guys already pointed out,
on the ledger of a commercial bank. Uh
it has value for two reasons. One, the
assets on the other side of that ledger
have value as well. And we can look at
them. We can tell, you know, are those
good assets? Are those bad assets? And
the reason we know what the assets are
is because America has this 250-year
tradition of
bank failure. And after every systemic
bank failure, we introduce new
regulations, new way of reporting what's
on the bank ledgers. Uh the idea of a
comptroller of the currency followed the
panic of 1837.
Uh
we slowly figured out how to make sure
the banks don't blow up. The FDIC after
the panic of of 1932. Um you know, I I
really honestly believe that of the
great things that America has produced,
it's, you know, uh the great American
songbook, country music, barbecue, and a
vast pool of federally insured dollars.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, we enjoy [music] talking about
money.
>> Yeah.
>> In all its flavors.
>> I love money.
>> Yeah, we all love money.
>> Someone's going to clip that.
>> That's it. That's the podcast.
>> going to clip that out, Joe, saying I
love money. You know, we I love money
talking about it in particular. Having
it's good, too. Talking about it's nice.
Um
>> Having it is even better.
>> What you can do with it, where you can
allocate it to, all very interesting
questions. But I have to admit I am a
sucker for like a Where does a good
old-fashioned 2:00 in the morning
Where does money come from discussion?
You know what I'm saying, Joe?
>> never been invited to any of your 2:00
a.m. in the morning Where [snorts] does
money come from discussions?
>> like Which came first, the money, you
know, I love like I love philosophy of
money, that sort of like history of
money, and where do you know, all that
stuff. Um I I it's a great topic.
>> There are a lot of social implications
tied up with the idea of money, which I
think, you know, have been explored at
various times, but they're always so
interesting to me, because I think even
today, if you think about money, and if
you think about the dollar specifically,
you know, we're used to talking about
like uh the dollar is doing this, the
dollar is doing that, but there's more
than one flavor of the dollar, right?
So, there's clearly cash at a simplistic
level, so the stuff that we keep in our
wallets or whatever. There are bank
dollars.
>> Yeah.
>> Um that are created by a bank and live
in the bank, and which you never
tangibly see, but you can do a lot of
stuff with if you have them.
>> You can convert them to dol- to cash
dollars at a one-to-one ratio.
>> That's right.
>> They trade at a one-to-one ratio to the
dol- to the other dollar.
>> That's the important thing. Um but,
there are also things like eurodollars,
which
>> you and I will never see being a
non-foreign depository institution.
>> Not in any case, um and there are uh
reserves held at the central bank, which
is arguably it's is its own thing,
right? There are also stablecoins, which
are dollar also often inspired to trade
at a one-to-one ratio to the dollar,
etc. What is the dollar? Is a You know
what the what's an interesting question.
So, one of the topics that comes up a
lot is like the future of the dollar,
etc. We don't talk as much about like
well, where did it come from in the
beginning? And like what was like, you
know, if we're going to talk about the
future of the dollar, don't we need to
know how we got here and how the dollar
was born and all that stuff? That seems
like an important question to answer
um before we talk about the future.
>> Yes, and also just in terms of social
and political economy terms, like who
actually controls the dollar, right?
Because there's this idea that it
belongs to the US Treasury, and they
they
they control the supply and all of that,
but as I just mentioned, there are all
these flavors of dollars that kind of
sit outside the US's direct control.
>> Yeah.
>> And so if you think about the dollar
being, you know, the both an exorbitant
privilege of America,
>> Yeah.
>> it's also in many respects a burden,
right?
>> Yeah, so they say. I mean, I don't know.
It seems pretty good as a as a currency,
but I've heard that and it is very
interesting to think about like, you
know,
you know, there's there's interest I
think it was um
I think it was Mark Carney when he was
Bank of England governor when he gave a
Jackson Hole speech talking about the
dollar's uh declining America's
declining role as a share of global GDP
and the dollar's increasing role as the
currency of trade and this weird
mismatch and you know, there's the all
this stuff where it's like
the central bank the Fed sets rates
based on American conditions and so
forth, but then that transmits globally
because so many entities use the dollar.
Anyway, we could go on and on. The good
talk about this stuff.
>> This this intro's just going to be a
Forest Gump style list of all the
different types of dollars. But no, I
mean, we should talk about all the
different types of dollars, but also
where they all came from and what all
their different purposes actually are
and what the upsides are for each of
them and the downsides. And we do in
fact have the perfect guest.
>> Yes.
>> Um someone who's been one of our
colleagues at various places. We're
going to be speaking with Brendan
Greeley. He's the author of the new book
The Almighty Dollar: 500 Years of the
World's Most Powerful Money. And you
might have a question immediately about
that 500 years subtitle.
>> I do.
>> Um he's also a contributing editor of
the Financial Times and uh we're very
excited to have him on Odd Lots. So
Brendan, welcome to the show.
>> Thank you. I've been waiting so long to
be the perfect guest.
>> Oh, did I say you were? I did. I did.
>> say I was the perfect guest. I was
waiting. I WAS HOPING.
>> I GET so paranoid that I'm not going to
say it and people read into it like, oh,
why was this this person the perfect
guest?
>> guest.
>> Um no, you
>> You are truly the perfect guest.
Why don't I jump in with that subtitle?
So a lot of people are going to see 500
years of the dollar, the world's most
powerful currency, and or most powerful
money, and they're going to go, "What?
What do you mean by 500 years?"
>> So, this book was a rabbit hole.
An editor suggested I write a book about
the history of the dollar, and as you
know, as a journalist, when somebody
asks you to do something, you just say,
"Yeah, I'll I'll figure [laughter] that
out." What's the deadline? Yeah, yeah,
I've got I've got a phone. I can call
people. And and I thought it was started
in 1971, we closed the gold window, and
then I sort of started unraveling the
sweater a little bit, pulling on the
thread, and I got to 1913 with the
chartering of the Fed, and then you end
up with a problem when you chase the
history of the dollar back to 1789 or
1776, which is
there's this assumption when we talk
about money of monetary sovereignty.
This is just the ability It's very
poorly defined. It's super hand-wavy, by
the way, monetary sovereignty. But
generally, it's the ability to the
country that a country has to control
its own currency.
So, under that assumption,
we had political independence, political
sovereignty in 1776, 1789, however you
want to define it, we should have also
had monetary sovereignty
under the assumptions that we use about
money. Unfortunately, we're stuck with
this problem, which is that our currency
is called the dollar.
That is a name that's derived from the
German, and it referred to a Spanish
coin that came from Bolivian silver or
Mexican silver.
>> Really? I already look I didn't know
this.
>> So, this is This is complicated, right?
We did not have this moment of
sovereignty. We did not have a new
country. We did not call our currency
the Washington. We called it the dollar,
which means we're borrowing something
else. We're basing our We are pegging
our currency as Americans at the at the
origin of the country to an existing
currency. Um you know, it's hard for
Americans to sort of conceive of how
insignificant the colonies were at the
founding. And so, we didn't have any
domestic source of gold. We didn't have
any domestic source of silver. We're
taking a global currency that's
circulating between the Andes and China
and through Europe, and sometimes it
washes up on the shores of the colonies.
We're so desperate to get it that we
then peg our currency to this silver
coin with a German name that comes from
Spain's empire. That's really
problematic if you believe in monetary
sovereignty, and if you believe that the
country creates the denominator. So now
you have a problem, or at least I had a
problem, which is I had to explain what
was this coin.
Why was it universal? Why was it called
the taller, the dollar? Um
why was Spain in charge? And why why
were the colonies powerless to do
anything about this coin? Then you end
up with a different story. Alexander
Hamilton called that coin the ancient
dollar. It was already something that he
knew existed, that he took for granted
um as 250 years old at the time. That's
when I fell down the rabbit hole, and
that's when I ended up literally at one
point at the bottom of a Czech silver
mine, uh because what we think of as the
dollar starts in 1520. Um and this ends
up being a problem because all of the
the way economists talk about money,
there's this break between metal and
paper. And so it's very difficult to
talk about this metal coin when we live
in a paper and digital money world now.
I think there's a connection, and I
think the moment of transition between
that coin and American bank money is
really important. The details matter. Um
the coin circulated in America as
currency until the 1850s, the silver
coin from the Spanish empire. Uh and so
to tell the story of the dollar, what I
realized is you cannot tell the story of
the country. This is not the story of
the Treasury Department, or the Fed, or
of Alexander Hamilton, or of America.
This is the story of the currency, which
is only sometimes uh a part of America.
>> I'm already riveted by this. I already
have a million questions. Just to back
up um a little bit or contextualize
this, we were at um that was just last
summer. We were at Princeton. You're
getting your PhD there, and you invited
us to um be on a panel, and we actually
turned it into a podcast episode where
we talked to a few other academics and
so forth, and I think the conference
that little mini conference was about
writing the biography of the dollar,
which you have, I I guess you've done it
now.
>> hope so. It's published.
>> so just tell us a little bit about like
what you've been up to. You're This is
you're getting a PhD. I like it's so
cool. Like when I sometimes in my mind,
I'm like if I could have done something
else, maybe it would have been go get a
history PhD, and you actually did it.
>> I I actually did it.
>> doing it.
>> Yeah. So, you know, I got this offer to
write the book about the dollar. As a
journalist, I said yes, and and then I
kind of got into trouble because
I started doing archival work, and I
didn't really feel like I knew how to do
archival work, and I started reading a
lot of secondary sources, and then I
began to have ideas. That's a problem
because when you are a person alone in
an office behind your garage with a dog
for years, and you start to have ideas.
>> of dog?
>> Oh, he's a
>> These are the important questions. I'm
sorry.
>> awful dog.
At least
we'll we'll talk about it later.
>> He's famous on the internet.
>> Oh, really?
>> Yes.
An internet mob made me get a dog
because my daughter did something cute.
She was begging for a dog, and then I
woke up the next morning, and I put it
on Twitter. I made the mistake of
putting this on Twitter 7 years ago. I
woke up the next morning, and J.K.
Rowling retweeted it.
>> Oh my god.
>> Yeah, yeah. So, the dog's name is J.K.
Rowling. So, I'm in this room alone with
J.K. Rowling the dog sitting on the
floor, and I begin to have ideas. And
the problem is if you have ideas alone
in a room, one of two things is true.
You're onto something, or you're insane.
And I got worried that I didn't know
what I was doing, and around the same
time I got invited by Seth Rockman. He's
a historian of early America at Brown to
a conference about the history of money.
I literally did not know that there were
historians who studied money.
And I loved what they did. They were
reading all the same things that I was
reading. They were worried and they were
curious about all the same things that I
was curious about. They were dealing
with the same questions, and and I told
a bunch of PhDs, this is amazing. I want
to go get a PhD in the history of money.
And they all said, "No. Do not do that.
That's a terrible idea." Um as PhDs
generally do. But I I applied to the
program at Princeton uh because Harold
James is there. He's a legendary
financial historian. Uh and um I love
the way he works because he takes
finance seriously.
>> [snorts]
>> And sometimes it's difficult to study
the history of money because it does end
up sounding like this 2:00 a.m. dorm
conversation. That frustrates me. I I
actually don't think money's that hard
to understand. It's just It's just
finance. Um and so Harold James takes
the finance of money seriously. Uh and I
was able to, you know, while I was
taking classes there, uh think about
this book and also make myself feel a
little more comfortable that the book is
in fact it rests on solid ground. The
people that I found as secondary
sources, they are known to other people,
right? And I am This book is written
within a tradition of thinking about
money uh as credit. And that uh but but
also to your point, like, yeah, it's
great. I love going back and getting a
PhD.
>> Yeah, it sounds cool.
>> There was a moment early on where I was
doing a project with another another
grad student and they're all in their
20s and I I make no sense to them
because I was like 47 when I started it
and I had four children and everything
about me was a mystery. They had a pool
going for a while on whether or not I
was on Instagram.
>> [laughter]
>> Um but one of the graduate students
said, uh
"Can you believe you're doing homework?"
And I said, "I can't believe I get to do
homework. This is amazing. I've had
jobs. Jobs are the worst."
>> Yeah.
>> I'm sorry. I've gone down a rabbit hole
of just looking at um pictures of J.K.
Rowling.
>> [laughter]
>> But it You're absolutely right. Um it
went viral. There's like Fox News
articles about it and everything. Um
okay, a serious question now. We're not
just going to talk about dogs. Although
I did learn from your book that there
were in fact dog dollars.
>> Dog dollars, yes.
>> Yes.
>> From the Netherlands.
>> So, a serious question though. Like, why
does it matter how we think about money?
Is it the case that like if you think of
money as like inevitably this like fiat
currency that's issued by a state that
you're always going to think that the
state is about to do something terrible
with it or like something nefarious
versus if you think about it as a social
construct, it implies something
different about the world and human
behavior. Why does this matter?
>> [snorts]
>> I get really frustrated with the
philosophy of money and I get really
frustrated with the phrase fiat or the
idea of fiat money
because fiat to me is a veil. It just
says it's magic. The state says poof,
that's money and they wave their hands,
they say fiat and then you have
something and that's money and how it
works doesn't really matter. Um
I think it really matters how we
manufacture money. Banks manufacture our
money. The Fed manufactures a different
kind of money. I love that list you guys
came up with of all the dollars. I keep
trying to list all the dollars I can
come up with. I have not completed the
list yet.
>> going to ask you how long you mentioned
this in the book. Like how long is your
list of
>> I think once man, I'm going to embarrass
myself if I try to recreate it, but I
got up to like 15 different kinds of
dollars.
>> Wow.
>> Uh you know, you've got money market
dollars. Now you've got stable coins and
euro dollars, of course. Um you know, if
you if you get a check from your
employer and you don't have a bank
account, you got to go to a check
casher. All of a sudden that's a
different kind of dollar cuz it doesn't
clear at par cuz you got to do a dis you
got to take a discount at the check
casher. Okay, but my frustration with
this idea of fiat is that it robs us of
the power of analysis. We can understand
money. We really can. For almost all of
our money sits, as you guys already
pointed out, on the ledger of a
commercial bank.
It has value for two reasons. One, the
assets on the other side of that ledger
have value as well and we can look at
them. We can tell, you know, are those
good assets, are those bad assets? And
the reason we know what the assets are
is because America has this
bank failure. And after every systemic
bank failure, we introduce new
regulations, new way of reporting what's
on the bank ledgers. The idea of a
comptroller of the currency followed the
panic of 1837.
We slowly figured out how to make sure
that banks don't blow up. The FDIC after
the panic of eight of 1932, um you know,
I I really honestly believe that uh of
the great things that America has
produced, it's, you know, uh the great
American songbook, country music,
barbecue, and a vast pool of federally
insured dollars.
We had several Look at Look at Joe.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Joe Joe's on board.
We [laughter] need to put the federally
insured dollars on that mug.
What country music, barbecue, and
federally insured dollars. Yeah,
>> [laughter]
>> that's good. What a That would be a good
name for a song, actually.
The problem with saying that it's fiat
means that we failed to understand how
important all these regulations are.
Before federally insured deposit federal
deposit insurance in the 1920s, there
were about 200 bank failures a year.
After that, there are usually no bank
failures a year. And if there are bank
failures, we're so surprised by them
that it becomes a thing in the financial
media that we got to talk about. How did
this happen? That used to be normal.
Banks used to just fail. And the reason
they don't fail, and the reason your
dollars don't fail, is because we have
slowly figured out what the best
practices are for making sure that banks
don't blow up. If we wave our hands and
say doesn't matter, it's fiat, probably
comes from the Fed, doesn't really
matter, then we lose the ability to say
our dollars have meaning because there's
assets on the other side of that balance
sheet. We can look at those assets. And
if we start to deregulate, we run into
trouble because all of a sudden we run
the risk that our dollars might not have
meaning anymore.
>> I want to get into what how we can
establish the value of why a dollar has
value in the first place and the balance
sheet liabilities of the bank and so
forth. Um and I have some questions or I
don't know, maybe quibbles, but probably
not quibbles. Probably just questions.
>> But before we get into that, let's just
do a little bit more history. What were
the conditions such that in 1791 or
whatever, Alexander Hamilton was talking
about something called an ancient dollar
that was
sort of something Spanish and German at
the same time. Like, give us like give
us those 250 years prior to the founding
of America or what it however many years
such that a global dollar had was
already long emerging.
>> All right, let's see if I can do this in
a way that I don't run out of time.
Okay, the dollar wasn't supposed to be
money.
>> Okay.
>> Um
there is a story, it is told in
histories of the dollar that there was a
count in Bohemia, his name was Stefan
Schlick. He had a lot of silver. Because
he had a lot of silver, his money became
global money.
None of that is true. I mean, it's all
true, but that's not how any of it
worked. So, Stefan Schlick was a count.
The problem is he didn't actually hold
any of the territory that he claimed in
Bohemia. He sort of held it in entirety
with all of his cousins and all of his
brothers. Somebody discovered silver in
this valley in Bohemia.
Stefan Schlick, the problem with silver
in the ground is that you need a lot of
money and a lot of expertise. It takes a
lot of capital, even in the 1520s, to
mine silver. Very complex machines
already
getting silver out of the ground,
draining water out of the mines. And so,
he realized that just having the silver
didn't mean anything. So, first thing he
did was he said, "This is mine."
Breathtakingly illegal. Then he went
over the border to Saxony and he got
Saxon mining investors and Saxon miners.
And they started pulling silver out of
the ground. So, this is already outside
of a long-established process of what
you do with silver and how it becomes
money in the rest of Europe. And in the
rest of Bohemia, if you found silver,
first of all, you had to pay a tax to
the king. Um
after that, it had to go to a
centralized mint. That mint had an
understanding that they had to create
money for everybody. So, not just big
coins for merchants, but the whole range
of big and little coins that worked for
wholesale purchases and retail
purchases. This is really crucial. I
think this distinction still exists
today, but it definitely existed in
early modern Europe, which is that Carlo
Cipolla is an Italian historian wrote
this beautiful book where he drew a
distinction between big money and little
money. Big money are large, high-value
coins, and they're for international
trade and merchants and the wealthy.
Little money is for
uh low-value trade, and it's for
purchases of meat and bread and labor.
>> So, like little copper coins or
something like that.
>> The challenge of big money and little
money, I think we still have it today
with banks, is that uh you're going to
love this, Joe. Um the brassage
on small coins is higher.
What that means is
to make a coin is an industrial process.
You've got a put one die on a stump, and
then the metal goes in the middle, and
then another die on top of it, and then
you whack the whole thing with a hammer.
I've seen it done. It's very loud. It's
an industrial process. It takes one
whack of the hammer to make every coin,
whether it's a big coin or a little
coin, which means that per unit of
value, the labor costs, the brassage,
the production costs are much higher for
little coins. So, this is
a consistent problem throughout the the
history of coinage. Constant complaints
that mints, which are actually private
companies, prefer to make the big coins
because the profit is the margins are
better on the big coins. They're smaller
on the small coins.
>> Well, this is partly why the US phased
out the penny recently, right?
>> Yes, absolutely. Um and so, uh what you
have then uh in this Bohemian Valley is
Saxon investors coming south, Saxon
miners coming south, uh sort of a
Bohemian count who doesn't really have a
title. Um and what they do is they start
getting silver out of the ground. All of
the silver goes into a single form,
which is what the Saxon investors would
have expected to get, a large silver
dividend coin. This was not local money.
This was not money for a valley in
Bohemia. This was paying back uh silver
investors. It went straight
>> in silver form.
>> in silver form. What they expected. So,
this is an early form of uh joint-stock
company.
>> Hm.
>> Um
uh uh Friedrich Engels actually believed
that uh this was the origin of the
joint-stock company. These silver mines,
it's just really expensive to get money
out of the ground. So, Saxon investors
would put together in this form, and
what they got out of this was a big
silver coin. It wasn't money. It was a
dividend. it was a it was a stamped pure
form of silver. So, you have this
exception where because the mine is
illegal, what's coming out of it is is
big high value silver coins.
No pennies, no little money, nothing,
just big money. So, all of this work, by
the way, I should credit Peter Vorlauf a
Trek historian who sort of pulled all of
this out of the archives. Um, but what
you then end up with is this exceptional
circumstance where it's not that there
was a lot of silver in the valley. It
was a big silver mine, but it you know,
it wasn't wildly out of proportion with
other silver mines in Europe. It said it
was only producing big coins. And it was
so hell-bent on producing just the big
dividend coins for Saxon silver
investors that
um, the miners revolted, actually. So,
they they struck twice and then they
finally sacked the town uh because and
their chief complaint was that they
weren't getting paid in the same quality
money that was leaving for Saxony.
Right? You have this big money, little
money problem, right? So, they
eventually to make the miners happy,
they have to solve this uh and sort of
make sure that they're minting little
pennies as well. Anyway, this coin then
becomes a standard uh for trade in the
Baltic. And you start to see copies of
the coin. Right? This is um in a
sovereign story, you create your own
money to your own standards. What
actually happened is you get little
city-states and kingdoms all over the
Baltic in northern Germany creating
copies of copies of copies of this
original coin from Joachimsthal.
All these coins come to be referred to
as Joachimsthaler, coins from
Joachimsthal. And then that gets
shortened
>> roll off the tongue, does it? But
>> So, that gets shortened to Thaler and
then in Dutch they also start calling it
>> Yes.
Yes. Are you from Joachimsthal?
>> I'm I'm watching
I'm from Joachimsthal, yeah.
>> Joe's head is exploding in real time.
>> Listen, we should mint Wiesenthaler.
>> Yes.
>> See what happens. [laughter] Yeah, yeah.
Thaler is German for valley, right? So,
then you get Thaler all over northern
Europe. So,
this then becomes in English dollar.
The first There's a mention of dollar in
Shakespeare. Uh uh in The Tempest and
again in the Scottish play, they talk
about dollars. It's not in the domestic
British currency system of pound,
shilling, pence. To them, they know
exactly what it is, the big silver coin
uh that comes from the low countries in
exchange for British wool and British
cloth. So,
already this story of sovereignty um and
the story of the fungibility of money
starts to break apart. And you've got
this coin that's copied again and again.
Okay. So, the Spanish have silver in
what is now uh Bolivia and Mexico. They
figure out this unbelievable brutal
regime,
uh the mita to you know, using forced
labor to actually get the silver out of
the ground. They've got the mercury from
somewhere else through the amalgamation
process that actually then uh turns the
silver uh turns, you know, ore into
silver. Um and uh uh
the thing is
Charles V
of Castile, Holy Roman Emperor, lord of
all he surveys,
has to follow the pattern of silver
production that already exists in
northern Germany. He's selling his
silver into the same silver markets in
Antwerp uh as everybody else. Which
means that he does not have the
sovereign right or the sovereign ability
to create his own silver. So, they sort
of hack an existing coin in the Spanish
currency system, the real. If you
multiply it by eight, there's a happy
accident, which is that uh it's ex-
almost exactly the same weight and size
as the Joachimsthaler. So, Spain starts
>> why a quarter is two bits?
>> Yes, that's exactly why.
>> Yeah.
>> So, pieces of eight that we know from uh
from pirate movies, right? That's that's
what that was. Piece of the pirate
movies piece of eight uh is named
because uh the Joachimsthaler was the
dominant form of silver and Spain had to
had to copy it. Uh so,
all you have this global flow of silver
already. Um
uh the Spanish in the late 1570s uh
develop a way to send galleons uh
straight from Mexican coast to uh
Manila. So, you've got this flow of
silver that's going straight to China.
It's going uh through Seville and into
Europe. It's also making its way to
China. China's sort of absorbing all the
silver in the world eventually. It all
takes the form of this dollar.
In English, it's known as the dollar.
Unambiguous, very clear what it is. Um,
so the colonies are also stuck on the
edge of this flow, and what you get is
actually weird currency devaluations
among the colonies. So, to get to the
Alexander Hamilton point, I think I'm
going to wrap this up. I think I maybe
did it in 7 minutes.
>> [laughter]
>> Uh,
you you end up with the colonies have
got their own forms of shilling-based
book credits. They're separate
currencies from what uh the the the the
British have. It's not sterling. It's
Pennsylvania shillings or Maryland
shillings. What starts to happen is they
start to devalue their own shillings.
So, to attract silver, sometimes
literally from Pirates of the Caribbean,
into their own ports, because that makes
the if the silver then can buy more in
that port, which means the port can
attract more silver. This is a problem
the British Empire eventually
recognizes. But this coin, you see it in
newspapers uh referred to as dollars.
People were offered rewards in one ads
uh for dollars. Uh, and um colonies are
fighting each other with currency
devaluations to try and attract the
dollar onto their shores. So, this is by
far the dominant form of money, not just
in the colonies, but globally.
>> That was great.
>> That was fantastic. I asked this
question partly out of personal
interest, cuz as Joe knows, for some
reason my dad keeps giving me parts of
his collection of silver coins.
>> Oh, yeah, that's what dads do.
>> Yeah, I know. It's the most dad thing
ever, and every every birthday I'm like,
thank you for my silver coin, but it's
it's lost some of the
the surprise value. But anyway,
how did we get from um the
thaler/dollars
to the silver dollar that became, I
guess, dominant in I want to say the
1800s?
>> It's just a copy.
We didn't get to. It's the same thing.
So, you have copies of copies of copies.
Anybody who has silver or can get some
through trade is turning them into
something that looks like a dollar, and
is immediately recognized as a dollar.
So, when you look at uh colonial
legislation, you've got catalogs of
different kinds of dollars. You've got a
Seville dollar, which meant it was meant
minted high quality in Seville. You've
got a what they called a Reichstaler,
which is
uh produced by the Holy Roman Empire,
exact same thing.
>> [snorts]
>> Uh
and they were they were
they were weighted the same way and then
it goes all the way down to as you
mentioned dog dollars. So there's this
Dutch dollar that
>> dollars.
>> Dog dollars so there's this Dutch dollar
with a recumbent lion on the obverse.
The recumbent lion once it gets worn
down looks like a dog begging for
scraps.
>> Yeah, he's sort of sit sitting up and
like begging, [laughter] right? Yeah.
>> Exactly. So so the dog dollar when
Benjamin Franklin arrived in
Philadelphia wet and and exhausted as a
teenager, he had in his pocket a few
shillings and a dog dollar.
>> Huh.
>> So there were different types of
dollars, but it was always it was always
very clear what a dollar was. It was So
in the 19 in the 18th century and even
into the 19th century. So these silver
dollars, again, I'm going to say this
again and again. I'm sort of very
skeptical of the idea of monetary
sovereignty. I think it you cannot
assume that it happens. It has to be
fought for over time. It's always
fraught and you're going to lose it if
you don't pay attention to it. But just
to to finish that thought the the silver
dollar that comes from Mexico is current
in America as money
until the 1850s.
>> Okay, this is sort of what I was getting
at with the question, but like how did
we get to the point where the silver
dollars that we recognize today in the
collections that our parents bequeathed
to us?
>> I think just your parents.
>> Okay.
>> Not mine.
>> Not yours? Okay.
>> My dad gives me life lessons but not
silver.
>> Oh, my dad doesn't give me many of those
actually. [laughter]
Um okay, but like the silver dollars
become a more dominant form of currency
around the world in the 1800s. What are
the conditions that allow those dollars
to start to replace previous or other
existing forms of dollars?
>> One thing that happens is you get high
quality mints in Mexico City and in
Potosi. This is the this is the
the the mountain where the silver is in
what is now Bolivia. And so
early on the Spanish Empire produced
what they called cobs. These are just
just little divots of silver stamped and
weighed. And then they circulated as
cobs. You could get them
in the colonies.
There's a
there's sort of there's fraud at the
mint. There's a problem with the weight
of the silver. And so this is in the man
it's in the early 18th century.
The Spanish figure this out and they
make sure that colonial mints are as
reliable are producing coins that are as
reliable as
the mint at Seville. So now all of a
sudden every piece of silver that leaves
those mines is in the form of this
dollar.
This is when you start to see
dollars show up in hordes in China.
So
cobs have been showing up in China for
the you know the the Chinese again again
are absorbing all the silver in the
world no matter where it's coming from.
It's headed for China cuz it's buying
porcelain and silk. This is the China
they weren't interested in any products
other than silver that came from Europe
or the new world.
>> Are you saying that China has a history
[laughter]
of not buying things from around the
world except accumulating financial
assets while the world buys things from
China? I'm doing the Trump I'm hearing
this for the first time. I'm a
>> I'm saying that while writing this book
I anticipated this conversation and I'm
so happy you took the bait.
>> All right, keep going. Keep going.
>> So so now to to Tracy's question what
you start to see in China is you know
not just cobs showing up in hordes.
These are new every once in a while
during construction someone will find a
box of coins. That tells us a little bit
about what people used at the time. So
when you date the coins to the 18th
century you actually start to see these
really nice high quality round milled
coins. And this is when so the word yuan
is refers to this coin. Yen refers to
this coin. The Malaysian ringgit
actually means jagged which refers to
the milling on the edge of this coin.
This coin becomes a global standard. The
Hong Kong dollar is not derived from the
American dollar. It's derived from this
very specifically shaped and trustworthy
piece of silver in the 18th century that
began to circulate not just
intercontinentally
but domestically within China. It starts
to move north from the trading ports in
the south. So,
it's [clears throat] the quality of the
mint to answer your question. It's sort
of Spain Empires are hard to manage.
It's very difficult to like figure out
how to get silver out of a hole in the
ground on the other side of an ocean and
then turn it into a high-quality coin.
Over time they figured this out and as
they figured this out you've got one
empire,
one silver, one coin. It's going
everywhere.
>> I would say it's because we have a
central bank that promises this dollar
can be redeemed for a basket of goods
and services that will only get 2% more
expensive every year. That there is this
sort of hard assets backing the US
dollar and you can go look what it is
that it says everything that's in the
CPI or PCE basket and we promise that
we're going to keep the ratio so that
they only get 2% more expensive every
year. We're not going to violate that
promise. Over time. Isn't it that
ability to actually extract some share
of the natural of the national output of
America that is why someone would want
to hold dollars and like if the US like
could no longer produce anything
productive
the central bank couldn't uphold that 2%
claim and then the dollar
>> Value would
>> Yeah, absolutely. But the mechanics and
the detail matter.
>> Okay.
>> So,
Argentina also is blessed with natural
resources and yet
the details of how it produces money
are not working out as well as they are
in the United States. So, I'm not a big
fan of of fiat as I've said. I'm also
not a big fan of the idea of full faith
and credit because that again just says
it doesn't really matter how it works.
Eventually the country will back it.
Well, how it works is really important
and I think it's important because it
allows us to then talk about the
mechanics of how the Fed actually works.
In the story that we all got in our
textbooks, uh,
I I will
I will not profess to know when you guys
went to college, but I I went back and
looked at my textbook and we had Mankiw
at Tulane University in 1995. Uh, it
hasn't changed from recent versions of
the Mankiw textbook. And, um, the
history of money is just kind of glossed
over.
It's, uh, there used to be coins and
then the paper represented the coins and
then now we've got a central bank and
it's fiat and the central bank produces
M0. It's really that simple. And then he
says, this drives me crazy. Now money is
just a social convention. Oh, is it
Greg? A social convention? Are we all of
a sudden talking about social mores in
this economics textbook? Like, the bond
market is a social convention and yet we
analyze it with some, you know, with
some rigor. Your mortgage is a social
convention and somehow when the subject
comes to money, we're back in a dorm
room with Joe at 2:00 in the morning
going
>> What I'm saying like I've come around.
Like what I'm saying is like I believe
that like the like maybe we're I maybe
>> We might agree.
>> We might agree. I'm saying like I think
it's sort of like
Why does a dollar have a value? Because
in the United States there is a lot of
pro- productivity of goods and services
and I can redeem them at a fairly stable
price from this year to the next. I'll
hold dollars for 10 years and the that
basket of goods will get more expensive
over 10 years. But roughly I'll be able
to redeem it again at some point for
real physical thing.
>> I think we 100% agree.
>> Okay, great.
>> But but the details of that system, I
think we we should we should not be
scared of those details.
>> Yeah, yeah, okay.
>> And I think you also run into a problem,
you know, I would say this because you
know, I'm training as a historian now.
Um, but you run into a problem when you
think of the Fed as the origin and the
protector of dollars, which is that we
had dollars in the 19th century before
we had a Fed and they kind of worked.
They blew up every once in a while. It's
better to have a central bank, um, but
it's not as if dollars were completely
valueless. And I think historically we
run into a problem because we're not
precise about what backing is.
I think we think now that backing is
just gold or silver. That's not the way
they thought about it at the time. There
was backing, which are the assets that
sit on the other side of this ledger. Um
and then there's redemption, which is
can you redeem it for gold and silver?
So, when we stopped redeeming financial
dollars for gold and silver,
the backing didn't go away. All of these
assets, which to your point are
productive assets in the real economy,
they still existed. We just got better
at managing the system so that we no
longer needed the edge case of
occasional redemption for gold and
silver. Uh and so, what you see over the
course of, you know, the 19th century
history of American banks is slowly over
time getting better at managing what
assets are on the bank's balance sheet.
How do we make sure the bank has what we
says it has? How do we make sure the
bank has the right mix of safe assets
and risky assets? That took a a a while
to figure out. You know, America had a
unique banking system. This is, you
know, there were
there were dollars and shillings
produced by colonial governments and
then state governments right after uh
the revolution um
that were wiped clean by the
Constitution. Constitution says states
may not issue bills of credit. That
expressly took money out of the job of
the states. I don't think they had to,
by the way. You know, we we tend to
assume that this was a good thing, that
they were a disaster, that they were
inflationary. Uh some were, some
weren't. Uh consistently in the colonial
period and then again after the
Revolutionary War, the only truly
inflationary money was Rhode Island.
Rhode Island seems to be the play the
reason why we can't have nice things.
Um
>> I knew it.
>> Rhode Island just destroys [laughter]
everything.
>> Oh, man. Uh you guys are going to get
emails. Uh
but um
but we didn't we didn't have to end that
experiment. It kind of worked. Colonies
came up with best practices to make sure
why financially that colonial paper
money had value. What we did was with
the Constitution, we took we wiped all
that clean and we handed it to the
banks.
Um I I was with a
So, I was with a uh a group of
historians and we're having dinner and
we end up talking about Hamilton, the
play and
>> As one does.
>> As one does. And I I said I was
frustrated because I don't think that we
should take it for granted that
Alexander Hamilton's financial system
was the one that had to happen or that
it was necessarily the best one for
everyone. And one of the historians
said, "You're literally the only person
I know who finds that problematic
because of the financial plan."
>> And just going back to the full
>> a non-crank hard money guy.
>> Oh.
>> No, sorry. No, sorry. I don't want to I
was trying to get to the money guy.
>> No, it's all right.
>> I'm a credit money guy.
>> All right. All right. Well, okay.
>> I I like I don't I mean I Okay.
>> No, I didn't mean I It was Tracy's turn
to ask a question and I threw that
>> Kind of, but I want to I want to come
back to that.
>> I just lobbed that grenade in there as
well.
>> Because you and I have the same history
of like encountering MMT at the same
time
>> Yeah.
>> and wrestling with it and trying to
figure out like does it make sense, does
it not make sense? And this where I am
right now is at the end of that long
process of wrestling with that. We'll
get to that.
>> Oh, we don't talk about MMT that much
these days, do we, Joe? Um just going
back to the full faith and credit part
of the conversation and the idea of the
dollar as both, you know, a source of
privilege and at times a potential
burden on the US or at least something
that can be mismanaged in various ways.
Can I ask something that's going on
right now? So, just bringing it up
[clears throat] to 2026. Um there's a
headline over the weekend in the Wall
Street Journal saying that the US was
considering a bail or the UAE was in
talks for a financial bailout from the
US, which drives me crazy as a headline,
but I understand as former journalist
that you can't put a currency swap line
>> Yeah.
>> in a headline and get the same amount of
readership.
But talk to us about like, I guess the
impositions that the dollar's role in
the global financial system actually put
on the central bank such that we see
headlines where it's like, you know,
the Federal Reserve has to provide
dollar liquidity for allies.
>> So, once you let go of the assumption of
monetary sovereignty, all of a sudden
you understand what euro dollars are.
It's very hard to explain to people what
euro dollars are. But, once you say,
"Look, anybody can create a dollar."
This is the old Hyman Minsky quote.
Like, "Anybody can make money and accept
it." Yeah, it's getting it accepted.
Well, it turns out that over the course
of the late 20th century, starting
quietly in the '50s, and then it becomes
this system by the '70s, banks in Europe
were marking up their own ledgers with
dollars. They were just manufacturing
dollars the same way American banks do
it. You guys know this story. My My
point is, once you recognize that the
banks just do it on their own, and the
country's trying to catch up. Um
you end up with this system. I I um you
know, I I think far more important than
aircraft carriers are swap lines
to the dollar. I I don't think that the
dollar is a product of Pax Americana. I
think it is the product of, if you have
dollars abroad on your on your balance
sheet, and you're not an American bank,
you're not subject to American
regulation,
you're not subject to American charters.
We've got no control over you
whatsoever. However,
in a panic, you guys know this. I just
want to like make the point clear.
The Federal Reserve will step in and
swap dollars with your central banks, so
your central bank can swap them
temporarily for you, so that liquidity
is, you know, sitting on your balance
sheet, and you you can make your own
dollars whole again with with dollar
with American dollars from the Federal
Reserve. Um
that to me doesn't say the Fed is the
origin of dollars. That to me says,
"Anybody can create a dollar. And if
you're important enough to the Fed,
they'll say, 'You know what? It is a
dollar. We're going to make sure that
that doesn't blow up.' And they always
say it for domestic reasons, you know,
it affects Americans when the when the
global system collapses. But, but yeah,
I think the swap lines are the most
important diplomacy we do. And you can
see that at Jackson Hole.
Like, every Jackson Hole, you know that
picture they take where that the the the
the chair of the Fed, and then whichever
central banker happens to be there, they
go for this walk, and the photographers
know that it's coming, and they're like
like we saw it last year.
So, I think of that as the Badgett
pageant.
Right? They like they're there to prove
that they all know each other, the
system works, it's stable, and in the
next panic, the dollars are coming.
>> I should just say we're recording this
on April 22nd. I don't know what's going
to happen with various swap lines, but I
did see another email come out today
from the Council on Foreign Relations
saying that they have both updated and
upgraded their um swap lines tracker.
So, take that as you will.
>> Wow.
I love that map.
>> I guess what I'm trying to understand is
like all right, monetary sovereignty,
kind of ambiguous term, dollars, they
precede the Fed, I get all that, sure,
you've convinced me, etc. But,
when those other banks or countries are
in a panic, they come to our Fed for our
dollars, right? So, what is it about the
dollars that we create?
What is it about American-made dollars
that seem to be special if, you know,
>> I I would take your point from earlier.
It is an incredibly productive economy,
still.
>> Okay.
>> We've got lots of real things in this
economy. I also think we've got
pretty good bank regulation.
>> Okay.
>> I I could ask for better, but we've got
pretty decent We've got stable banks.
Nobody else has the pool of federally
insured dollars that we have. Europe has
got okay banking regulation, but they do
not share common deposit insurance. We
have that. So, uh
I I think that the the combination of
>> Yeah.
>> um
a responsible Fed, uh
reasonable
>> uh
>> financial regulation, and a massive
productive economy means that yes, of
course, the dollars we create here are
going to have more meaning. I don't want
to
>> is the key So, this is I think the key
thing, which is that
what's happening on the most sort of
abstract level, when there's a swap or
something like that, or a currency swap,
is that there is a transaction happening
from foreign-made dollars to
American-made dollars, and the reason
that American made dollars are pretty
good
>> Yeah.
>> or maybe a little bit better than other
dollars is because they're what?
>> They sit on this regulatory regime,
which which was still there despite
constant attempts to chip it away. I
also think that you it's impossible to
compare any other asset in the world to
a treasury.
>> Okay.
>> Uh
almost everything that's on the asset
side of the Fed's balance sheet is a
treasury. And you know, the American
economy is productive and the American
federal government is going to continue
to have the ability to take in taxes of
in-bank dollars, which then give
treasuries meaning. It's just like
there's nothing else comparable to the
volume of treasuries, and there's almost
nothing else comparable to the security
of treasuries. I don't I don't think the
Fed is irrelevant. I don't think America
is irrelevant. What I'm pointing out is
one of the reasons that the dollar is
global is because
Americans over the course of the '60s
and '70s said, "Go ahead. Make your own
dollars abroad. We're not going to stop
you."
They They sort of allowed this system to
bloom all over the world, and then and
only then was the Fed made responsible
for those dollars. I'm I'm trying to
invert the production of money.
>> Yeah.
>> The economist started at the Fed. It
starts everywhere. And I think that
central banks We have central banks
because we need them because banks are
so important, we need our own big bank
to do a job for us. The original goal
that the charter of the Bank of England,
its original purpose was to carry on the
war against France. That's all it was
supposed to do. So, central bank is just
a big bank that does what we need it to
do. And so, in this case, the Federal
Reserve uh is doing a thing that we
think is diplomatically important.
>> Do you think Is there anything to the
part of the MMT story in your view in
which taxes help create the demand for a
currency and thus give it some element
of moneyness?
>> Here's where that falls apart for me.
>> [sighs]
>> We have so many forms of dollars that we
have to be specific about what we're
actually taxing and what we're actually
spending. And what the United States is
actually spending out of the Treasury
General Account is bank dollars. Those
dollars were created in commercial
banks. They were taxed in or they were
they were bought in. I can hear MMTs
right now just but heads exploding
everywhere. But I really believe this.
You know, you look at the accounting,
it's very clear.
The
um
the Treasury the Treasury General
Account of the Fed, you know, takes in
money through taxes and it takes in
money when it sells Treasuries.
And then it spends it back out of the
economy. So it's specifically bank
dollars that have meaning. So yeah, it
has meaning that you have to pay your
American taxes in American bank dollars.
But those bank dollars don't just have
meaning because they're taxing in bank
dollars. They have meaning for all the
other reasons that we've talked about.
All the bank regulations, the Federal
Deposit Insurance, country music, all of
it. Like our what give
the the the the dollar value. So I think
this idea that you're just And this is
by the way, so people who believe in
this theory of of of of money really
like to point to colonial monies. So we
you know, all all most of the colonies
eventually all of them had their own
forms of paper money. And they did in
fact print them up and they did in fact
tax them back out. However,
they also all had a sinking fund which
was basically it was a promise to take
in silver and gold in tolls in and port
duties at their various ports
and then
from time to time sink those dollars,
buy them back with silver and gold.
There was a coin sitting on the edge of
this. This was true in New York, this is
true in New Jersey, this is true in
Pennsylvania, this is true in Maryland.
And so
to just say they printed these dollars
up and they made sure they weren't
counterfeitable and they they wrote on
the back "Tis death to counterfeit."
That came from the Benjamin Franklin
shillings.
Um if I ever get a tattoo, that's the
tattoo.
>> [laughter]
>> And and then taxed them back in. You
know, there's a lot of work being done
and the dominant theory of that among
historians is it was given money it was
given value because you had to tax it
back in. The problem is you have In
order to believe that, you have to
ignore the infrastructure that they put
in place of the sinking fund to make
that money have value. And you have to
assume they didn't know what they were
doing. This is my frustration with
economic history. It often assumes that
people in the past didn't know what they
were doing with money.
>> Right. They just sort of stumbled into
it.
>> They knew way more than we know. Like
I've spent a lot of time reading the
Maryland Gazette from the 18th century.
They were talking about discount rates.
They were talking about bills of
exchange on London. They were talking
about you would regularly get the the
value of stock in the Bank of England.
Like it was like reading um you know a
an analyst
often. They were really sophisticated.
They really understood how money worked.
>> How fun was it to write this book?
Because, you know, we sort of touched on
it earlier, but like you got to go to
all these archives. You got to go in I
think you said a Czechoslovakian cave or
something.
>> I did. I'm going to tell you how much
fun it was and then I'm going to hope
that my wife never hears this because I
[laughter] think I complained constantly
over the writing of this book. Um I love
being in archives and I love being in
libraries. And one thing that I learned
how to do that I'm going to do for the
rest of my career is
read ledgers as history.
>> Mhm.
>> And they often get ignored. You know,
people write like to read letters, but
people kept their financial documents
and
I think that you actually have less of a
reliable narrator problem when you're
looking at financial records because
they had to keep them accurately. You
can lie in a letter in a way that you
cannot lie in a ledger.
And so you can read ledgers from the
19th century. I have this sort of full
history of the career of a man who moved
from New Jersey in the 1830s to New
Orleans and he sold carriages and sort
of we know how money worked cuz he sold
and then we sort of know how we I think
he had advanced notice of the panic of
1837 because he seems to have cashed in
pulled a lot of cash out right before
the panic. Like he knew what was going
[snorts] on.
And then
you know, and then you can see how he
decided that he wanted to be a sugar
planter and how he made that financial
transition. Transition. And then exactly
how money worked for him once he was on
a sugar plantation.
No cash at all. Everything was on paper.
He he he sold sugar to his factor. You
can read all these documents in New
Orleans. The factor kept a running
account with him. If you wanted to buy
something in New Orleans, he would write
a letter to the factor and the factor
would send something back up and just
subtract it from his account. He didn't
have any physical cash. And when he
wanted to do something actually in St.
James Parish where he was,
um he he would write promissory notes.
And those promissory notes would circle.
We've got all the signatures on the
back. So, for me the like what I now
love to do weirdly is read old ledgers
because it's like watching a movie. It's
like running the tape back of exactly
what somebody did sometimes hour by hour
by hour during their day when you get a
sense of their commercial life, you can
also get a sense of their life and you
can see these actions they're taking
point by point. That I mean and there
are amazing stories. Uh and there's
there's
I chased a story about this guy. Uh he
had a promissory note go bad so he had
to take it to a New Orleans notary and
then the notary had to go find the guy
who had written the promissory note. It
turns out he wasn't at his house anymore
because his wife had kicked him out and
he was living in a stable. And they
tracked him down at the stable. This is
all in the notarial records while
they're trying to like and then it turns
out that he eventually stole a horse and
left New Orleans.
>> And then he had to go on a massive road
trip and track him down, right?
>> No, unfortunately. That then that then
I'd have a movie script. I unfortunately
do not have a movie script.
>> I would yeah.
>> Is this what you learn in school like
when you study to be a historian?
No, but do you learn like the the the
techniques of archival research? Cuz I
wouldn't know the first thing of like
how to even like find I mean these days
I would just
probably Google or chat GPT what what
archival library might have this
information. Maybe I'd start my search
there or something like that. But this I
would like
when when they when they talk in the
academic setting about training to be a
historian
are these like sort of like the the the
craft of the trade that you learn? Like
how do you learn how to
>> I thought that I would.
>> identify the library and get to you know
know where in the library to look and
which stacks to look into.
>> So, that's a really important question
and the answer is not what you think it
is.
>> Okay.
>> They do not teach you how to do that.
>> Oh, I just assumed that's what
>> You read a lot of secondary literature.
You read a lot of theory.
You talk a lot about sort of you do a
lot of historiography.
So you know you'll you'll you'll take a
course as a graduate student and and
you'll sort of you'll look at all the
different ways that people have seen the
same period. Um
The archives it's a little weird. It's
like
you know the cliche of some societies
where
you know when a child is ready to be an
adult they send them out into the woods
they got to live on their own and they
just got to figure it out. Good luck to
you kid try to kill a wolf and come
home. Um Uh that's a little bit what
it's like in the archives. I kept on
asking like how do I do this? They're
like go figure it out.
>> Really?
>> And so you do kind of figure it out. I
have a I have ways of going into the
archives now and recording things. I'm
much better at it than I used to be.
There are a couple things I know like I
now always bring food in the bag to the
archive cuz an archive is often sort of
not near a good source of food. So you
have to have some sort of protein bar in
your bag.
>> Wait but one thing I know about the
archives they don't let you eat in
>> Well not in the archive.
>> Right okay.
>> [clears throat]
>> Uh but you have to figure it out on your
own. You know I looked a lot of bank
records in New Orleans and the the
records of the Citizens Bank in New
Orleans
um were literally underwater during
Katrina. Uh Jones Hall at Tulane
University flooded and so they they did
this amazing thing where very quickly
they recovered them they got them out of
the water and they irradiated them to
kill anything but I've talked to other
people who've looked in those
those archives and you get sick
flipping through them. You feel gross
after two days of doing that because I
think there's bad stuff in those pages.
Some of the pages are stuck together. So
you know the archive itself is this
living thing
you know which also there are lots of
theories about the about what gets kept
and what doesn't. When you're in an
archive you have this idea that like
this is the record of what happened.
Nope.
>> It's the record of was decided to be
kept.
>> That's exactly right and so often you
know I I looked at I sort of
constructed
sort of a brief story about
an enslaved woman in St. James Parish
based on some promissory notes that sent
her around the parish from from one
plantation to another. You can sort of
you you have to nobody kept those
records on purpose so that we could get
her story. But, it's possible to read
they call it you know, reading between
the archives.
So, you have to do a lot of that work. I
I really think that I almost don't want
to say it out loud. I think that ledgers
are an incredibly underutilized
resource. They give us a picture. I I I
was in London last last month and um
I found the complete financial records
of John Locke. It wasn't this like big
archival discovery. They're there.
They're in the catalog, but nobody looks
at them. I can tell you exactly how he
paid for everything. And for a man who
didn't believe that credit was a good
form of money, he sure seemed to use a
lot credit. [laughter]
>> All right, Brendan Greeley. Thank you so
much for coming on Odd Lots. The book is
The Almighty Dollar, 500 Years of the
World's Most Powerful Money.
>> Thank you.
>> Joe, that was a lot of fun.
>> It's such a great conversation.
>> Obviously. And the book is really really
interesting and it's full of that like
archival detail that really comes
through. One thing that stood out for me
from that conversation, again, it's sort
of going back to that point of like
the dollar is not fully under the US
government's control, right? And there
are times when there are other entities
out there who can create their own
dollars, as Brendan was describing. At
which point like it does become an
obligation on the United States to
support those dollars. And it can become
another political tool, but it's still
like a constraint in many ways.
>> No, it's super interesting. You know, I
guess I never thought about um okay, so
you know, I have because we've done
several episodes including our series on
the history of Eurodollars, like the
idea that foreign banks can manufacture
dollars. That I sort of can understand.
But, it actually really deepens my
understanding of it further to for to
get the idea that well, actually long
before there was a United States, there
was the decentralized manufacturing of
dollars.
>> Right.
>> Which I hadn't really thought about that
or even like really known about that
aspect before, but that dollars is this
thing that had decentralized
manufacturing for a long time. I guess
the one thing that like I had sort of
understood, you know, so William
Jennings Bryan gave the famous Cross of
Gold speech in which he argued that we
should have bimetal I think it was a
bimetallist or that we should have
silver.
And I remember there being like you
know, my my my understanding of
historical monetary is not that strong,
but I knew this thing that was like
independent mints could like mint silver
dollars at times and because there was a
lot of silver the be more um
more inflationary the farmers wanted it
or something like that. So, I guess I
sort of did know that the product the
literal production of dollars had always
been this sort of decentralized thing.
>> thing.
>> quite appreciated like how far that went
back.
>> Yeah.
The urge to to make dollars is uh is
inescapably human, I think. Everyone
wants to make their own money in some
form or another, whether it's like just
a simple barter system or like a ledger
of credit that you keep track of.
>> so interesting that there was this thing
called dollars and all around the world,
you know, I get it's like a standard,
right? Like it's it's like a um
I'm trying to like think of like what is
like a good analogy to it, but it's like
it was almost like the dollar was a sort
of common standard that anyone could,
you know, it's like anyone could make a
CD that fits in a CD player or something
like that.
>> user interface and a network effect.
>> yeah. It could be that one day like US
global hegemony has like long gone and
people talk about America is just like
this thing in the history books. This
used to be a great power and then blah
blah blah. And everyone still using the
dollar. It could be pretty good.
>> Totally. It's a
>> On that note, should we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> Okay. This has been another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
You can follow me at Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow Brendan
Greeley. He's at BHGreeley. Follow our
producers, Carmen Rodriguez at
CarmenArman, Dasha Bennett at DashBot,
Keil Brooks at KeilBrooks, and Kevin
Lozano at KevinLloydLozano.
>> And for more Odd Lots content, you
should check out our daily newsletter.
You can find that at
>> And you can chat about all of these
topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odd
lots.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please like the video or leave a
comment or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.